Hackathon is an event lasting several days in which a large number of people come together to collaborate on software or hardware projects and they are often organised by companies, universities or other organisations, and can have a specific theme or focus. The goal of a hackathon is to promote innovation and creativity, and to bring together individuals with diverse skill sets to work on new ideas and technologies.
]Hackathons tend to have a specific focus, which can include the programming language used, the operating system, an application, an API, or the subject and the demographic group of the programmers. In other cases, there is no restriction on the type of software being created or the design of the new system. 
One should participate in hackathons because it can be a great opportunity to learn new skills, meet new people and potentially develop an idea into a working prototype. If you are looking to gain experience in a particular field or if you are interested in working on a specific problem or theme is a good way to get started.
Datathons or data-focused hackathons challenge data scientists working with others attending to together use creativity and data analysis skills and platforms to build, test and explore solutions and dashboards which analyse huge datasets in a limited amount of time. Datathons are used to deliver insights in big public and private datasets in various disciplines including business, health care news, media and for social causes.
Code sprints work on a single application, such as an operating system, programming language, or content management system and are especially popular for open source software projects, such events are sometimes the only opportunity for developers to meet face-to-face. Code sprints last from one week to three weeks and often take place near conferences at which most of the team attend. 
The registrations are open for these hackathons currently ServiceNow , Low Code Nirvana and Tri NIT hackathon. You can try these to learn and grow in the field of technology.
ServiceNow Women Code to Win Hackathon invites female engineering students pursuing a career in technology to create impact and help solve some of the most challenging real-life problems at annual Women Code to Win 2023 – India. Eligibility Criteria for Women Code to Win – India is for female full-time students across all engineering colleges in India who are pursuing BE/ BTech/ ME/ MTech/ Dual Degree/ MSc/ MCA and graduating in the year 2023/ 2024/ 2025. Registration Deadline for ServiceNow is 01 Feb 23, 11:59 PM IST. Competition Levels in SericeNow include Level 1 Quizzing + Coding this is the entry level to ServiceNow Women Code to Win Contest which will test the student teams based on their technical and coding skills and this round has two parts of evaluations: Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ) and Coding. Level 2 in ServiceNow is – Ideathon this level will challenge the student teams on their creative thinking, problem-solving and design thinking skills. Problem statements for this level are Future of Sustainable Environment, Future of Workplace, Future of Automation (Hyperautomation) and Future of Education. Level 3 in ServiceNow is – Prototype Building and Finale Presentation this level aims to test the technical, functional, innovation and problem-solving capabilities of the participating teams and shortlisted student teams will be allocated 2 mentors per team from ServiceNow who will guide them in building the prototype. Online Quiz and Coding Round Deadline in ServiceNow is 04 Feb 23, 09:00 PM IST and Level 1 Results Declaration will be on 06 Feb 23, 06:00 PM IST. To register for ServiceNow Hackathon visit https://unstop.com/competition/servicenow-women-code-to-win-2023-india-servicenow-519305?ref=aBONuHDj&s=08
Low Code Nirvana is a unique low-code hackathon that will teach participants how to create creative solutions to real-world problems without having much technical skills. The Deadline to  register for Low Code Nirvana is 03 Feb 23, 12:00 AM IST. The Team size of Low Code Nirvana is 2 , and inter college teams are allowed.Low Code Nirvana teams would have to build an innovative solution based on the given problem statement. The platform used in Low Code Nirvana is RunCode.io . Top teams with the best solutions would get to present offline. 
The Tri-NIT Hackathon is a 36-hour event where thousands of students from all over India come together to work on fun problem statements based on software and electronics domain to give an obliging solution. The National Institute of Technology , Trichy is organising the Tri-NIT Hackathon. The Tri-NIT Hackathon is a perfect collaboration between the prestigious colleges brings you a golden opportunity to test your skills against the best for cash prizes, varied opportunities, goodies and more! Goal of Tri-NIT Hackathon is to build and create technology projects from scratch, which the experienced judges will judge to give the top contestants. Tri-NIT Hackathon gives you chance to win prize money worth Rs. 1,00,000+ sponsored by Qualcomm, BharatX and Postman with potential internship and full time opportunities as well!. The Tri-NIT Hackathon commences on February 10, 2023, and concludes on February 12, 2023.The Tri-NIT Hackathon  participants can participate alone or in groups of two or a group of a maximum of three. The deadline to register for Tri-NIT Hackathon is not finalised yet.. you can checkout their website too for more details https://unstop.com/hackathon/the-tri-nit-hackathon-national-institute-of-technology-nit-trichy-594092 . 
Hack the Crisis Global Hackathon is a global hackathon that aims to bring together developers, designers, and entrepreneurs to solve problems related to the COVID-19 pandemic you can checkout more at https://www.mygov.in/task/hack-crisis-%E2%80%93-india-online-hackathon/ .
The Climate Strike Hackathon is a hackathon that focuses on developing solutions to mitigate the effects of climate change , you can find more details at https://climatechangemakers.devpost.com/ .
NASA Space Apps Challenge is a global hackathon that focuses on developing solutions to problems related to space exploration and the Earth , you can explore more at there website.